[blog] v7 stable release (#45623)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/material-ui-v7-is-out.md

---
title: Material UI v7 is out 🚀
description: Material UI v7 is now stable, improving integration with modern tools and consistency across the library.
date: 2025-03-31T12:00:00.000Z
authors:
  ['aarongarciah', 'brijeshb42', 'diegoandai', 'janpot', 'mnajdova', 'siriwatknp']
tags: ['Material UI', 'Product']
manualCard: true
---

Material UI v7 is now stable.
This major improves the integration with modern tools and consistency across the library.
It is designed to be straightforward to upgrade to.
`

## Improved ESM support

> Our package layout has been updated, we now unambiguously support both valid ESM and commonjs through the exports field in package.json.

Reviewer: vale
```suggestion
The package layout has been updated, Material UI packages now unambiguously support both valid ESM and commonjs through the exports field in their package.json.
```

> This update fixes several issues with popular bundlers like Vite and webpack, and makes it possible to load our packages from ESM modules under Node.js.

Reviewer: vale
```suggestion
This update fixes several issues with popular bundlers like Vite and webpack, and makes it possible to load the packages from ESM modules under Node.js.
```

---
title: Material UI v7 is out 🚀
description: Material UI v7 is now stable, improving integration with modern tools and consistency across the library.
date: 2025-03-31T12:00:00.000Z
authors: ['diegoandai']
tags: ['Material UI', 'Product']
manualCard: true
---

Material UI v7 is now stable.
This major improves the integration with modern tools and consistency across the library.
It's a lean upgrade designed to be straightforward to upgrade to.

## Improved ESM support

The package layout has been updated to comply with ESM.
This is achieved by adding the `exports` field to the `package.json` file.
The `export` field indicates where bundlers can find CJS, ESM, and modern bundle files.

> You can read more about this in the [Node.js documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html#packages_exports).

Reviewer: Perhaps
```
Our package layout has been updated, we now unambiguously support both valid ESM and commonjs through the `exports` field in `package.json`.
```

This update fixes several issues with popular bundlers like Vite and webpack.
It also reduces the amount of setup required to work with these tools.

> ## Opt-in support for CSS layers

Author: We backported this to v6, but I think it's still worth mentioning here as it relates to Tailwind v4. It was worked on during the v7 cycle anyway.

> The `enableCssLayer` prop has been added to `ThemeProvider`.

Reviewer 2: I think it should be this (`ThemeProvider` does not know about CSS layer):

```suggestion
CSS layer (`@layer mui`) support has been added for Next.js App Router and Vite frameworks.
The Next.js Pages router is in the finishing line.
```

Reviewer 3: @siriwatknp why only Next.js App Router and Vite? `<StyledEngineProvider enableCssLayer>` doesn't work with other bundlers?

Author: @siriwatknp explained it to me:

- `<StyledEngineProvider enableCssLayer>` will work for client-side applications (like Vite)
- Next.js App Router is supported via https://mui.com/material-ui/integrations/nextjs/#using-other-styling-solutions
- Next.js Pages Router and other server-side frameworks are not supported yet (right @siriwatknp?)

We'll add examples for the supported use cases.

Reviewer 2: > Next.js Pages Router and other server-side frameworks are not supported yet

At the time of writing, correct. Next.js Pages Router support is a [wip](https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/45596).

Here is an example of how to enable CSS layer for Next.js App Router to integrate with Tailwind v4
---

```js
// app/layout.tsx
import { AppRouterCacheProvider } from '@mui/material-nextjs/v15-appRouter';
import GlobalStyles from '@mui/material/GlobalStyles';

export default function RootLayout(props) {
   const { children } = props;
   return (
     <html lang="en">
       <body className={roboto.variable}>
+        <AppRouterCacheProvider options={{ enableCssLayer: true }}>
+          <GlobalStyles styles="@layer theme,base,mui,components,utilities;" />
            <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>
              {children}
            </ThemeProvider>
          </AppRouterCacheProvider>
       </body>
     </html>
   );
 }
```

Author: @siriwatknp can we have one for using `StyledEngineProvider` for client-side applications as well?

Reviewer 2: Sure, here it is.

```diff
// main.js
import { StyledEngineProvider } from '@mui/material/styles';
import GlobalStyles from '@mui/material/GlobalStyles';
import App from './App';

createRoot(document.getElementById("root")!).render(
  <StrictMode>
+    <StyledEngineProvider enableCssLayer>
+      <GlobalStyles styles="@layer theme,base,mui,components,utilities;" />
      <App />
+    </StyledEngineProvider>
  </StrictMode>
);
```

Author: Thanks!

When enabled, Material UI styles are wrapped in a CSS layer named `@mui`.

> This allows Material UI to integrate with modern tools that rely on CSS layers, like Tailwind CSS v4.

Author: Not sure what Vale is complaining about here 🤔

> This allows Material UI to integrate with modern tools that rely on CSS layers, like Tailwind CSS v4.

Reviewer 4: It's the non-breaking space instead of regular space - here to avoid breaking the word over two lines. 😉 
```suggestion
This allows Material UI to integrate with modern tools that rely on CSS layers, like Tailwind CSS v4.
```

## Completed the slot pattern implementation

> The API for replacing or modifying inner elements of components has been standardized.
> All components that require it now implement the slot pattern through the `slots` and `slotProps` props.
> A [guide about this pattern](/material-ui/customization/overriding-component-structure/) has been added to the documentation.
> 
> This increases the consistency between components, making it possible to transfer knowledge from one to the other and improving the developer experience overall.

Reviewer 3: Rephrasing the first paragraph a bit seems to make the second paragraph unnecessary.

```suggestion
The API for replacing or modifying component inner elements is now standardized, and all relevant components use the `slots` and `slotProps` props for greater flexibility and consistency.
A [guide about this pattern](/material-ui/customization/overriding-component-structure/) has been added to the documentation.
```

> ## Reduced bloat

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Removed deprecated APIs
```

APIs that were deprecated in v5 have been removed.

> This reduces the library's bloat, keeping the API and docs leaner and easier to navigate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This reduces the library's API surface, keeping the API and docs leaner and easier to navigate.
```

Visit the upgrade guide for a [list of removed APIs](/material-ui/migration/upgrade-to-v7/#deprecated-apis-removed).

## Get started

> Ready to upgrade to Material UI v7?
> Head to [the v7 upgrade guide](/material-ui/migration/upgrade-to-v7/) next.

Reviewer 3: Reading this question makes me think it might be quite some work to upgrade to v7. Maybe we can rephrase it?

```suggestion
Head to [the v7 upgrade guide](/material-ui/migration/upgrade-to-v7/) and upgrade today.
```
